PHAEDO (selections)
Characters
Phaedo (The Narrator)
Apollodorus
Cebes
Echecrates
Crito
Socrates
Simmias
The Servent of the Eleven
Scene—The Prison of Socrates

[Socrates is speaking] . . . My dear Cebes, if all things in which there is any life were to
die, and when they were dead were to remain in that form and not come to life again,
would not the necessary result be that everything at last would be dead, and nothing
alive? For if living things were generated from other sources than death, and were to
die, the result is inevitable that all things would be consumed by death. Is it not so?
It is indeed, I think, Socrates, said Cebes; I think that what you say is perfectly true.
Yes, Cebes, he said, I think it is certainly so. We are not misled into this conclusion. The dead do come to life again, and the living are generated from them, and the
souls of the dead exist; and with the souls of the good it is well, and with the souls of the
evil it is evil.
And besides, Socrates, rejoined Cebes, if the doctrine which you are fond of stating, that our learning is only a process of recollection, be true, then I suppose we must
have learned at some former time what we recollect now. And that would be impossible
unless our souls had existed somewhere before they came into this human form. So that
is another reason for believing the soul immortal.
But, Cebes, interrupted Simmias, what are the proofs of that? Recall them to me;
I am not very clear about them at present.
One argument, answered Cebes, and the strongest of all, is that if you question
men about anything in the right way, they will answer you correctly of themselves. But
they would not have been able to do that unless they had had within themselves knowledge and right reason. Again, show them such things as geometrical diagrams, and the
proof of the doctrine is complete.
And if that does not convince you, Simmias, said Socrates, look at the matter in
another way and see if you agree then. You have doubts, I know, how what is called
knowledge can be recollection.
Nay, replied Simmias, I do not doubt. But I want to recollect the argument about
recollection. What Cebes undertook to explain has nearly brought your theory back to
me and convinced me. But I am nonetheless ready to hear you undertake to explain it.
In this way, he returned. We are agreed, I suppose, that if a man remembers anything, he must have known it at some previous time.
Certainly, he said.
Plato, Phaedo (72c–83c, 114e–118b), translated by F.J. Church (New York: Macmillan/Library of the Liberal
Arts, 1951).

72d

e

73

b

c

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

48

d

d

74

b

c

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 48

PLATO

And are we agreed that when knowledge comes in the following way, it is recollection? When a man has seen or heard anything, or has perceived it by some other
sense, and then knows not that thing only, but has also in his mind an impression of
some other thing, of which the knowledge is quite different, are we not right in saying
that he remembers the thing of which he has an impression in his mind?
What do you mean?
I mean this. The knowledge of a man is different from the knowledge of a lyre, is
it not?
Certainly.
And you know that when lovers see a lyre, or a garment, or anything that their
favorites are wont to use, they have this feeling. They know the lyre, and in their mind
they receive the image of the youth whose the lyre was. That is recollection. For
instance, someone seeing Simmias often is reminded of Cebes; and there are endless
examples of the same thing.
Indeed there are, said Simmias.
Is not that a kind of recollection, he said; and more especially when a man has this
feeling with reference to things which the lapse of time and inattention have made him
forget?
Yes, certainly, he replied.
Well, he went on, is it possible to recollect a man on seeing the picture of a horse,
or the picture of a lyre? Or to recall Simmias on seeing a picture of Cebes?
Certainly.
And it is possible to recollect Simmias himself on seeing a picture of Simmias?
No doubt, he said.
Then in all these cases there is recollection caused by similar objects, and also by
dissimilar objects?
There is.
But when a man has a recollection caused by similar objects, will he not have a
further feeling and consider whether the likeness to that which he recollects is defective
in any way or not?
He will, he said.
Now see if this is true, he went on. Do we not believe in the existence of equality—
not the equality of pieces of wood or of stones, but something beyond that—equality
in the abstract? Shall we say that there is such a thing, or not?
Yes indeed, said Simmias, most emphatically we will.
And do we know what this abstract equality is?
Certainly, he replied.
Where did we get the knowledge of it? Was it not from seeing the equal pieces of
wood, and stones, and the like, which we were speaking of just now? Did we not form
from them the idea of abstract equality, which is different from them? Or do you think
that it is not different? Consider the question in this way. Do not equal pieces of wood
and stones appear to us sometimes equal and sometimes unequal, though in fact they
remain the same all the time?
Certainly they do.
But did absolute equals ever seem to you to be unequal, or abstract equality to be
inequality?
No, never, Socrates.
Then equal things, he said, are not the same as abstract equality?
No, certainly not, Socrates.

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 49

PHAEDO

49

Yet it was from these equal things, he said, which are different from abstract
equality, that you have conceived and got your knowledge of abstract equality?
That is quite true, he replied.
And that whether it is like them or unlike them?
Certainly.
But that makes no difference, he said. As long as the sight of one thing brings
another thing to your mind, there must be recollection, whether or no the two things
are like.
That is so.
Well then, said he, do the equal pieces of wood, and other similar equal things, of
which we have been speaking, affect us at all this way? Do they seem to us to be equal,
in the way that abstract equality is equal? Do they come short of being like abstract
equality, or not?
Indeed, they come very short of it, he replied.
Are we agreed about this? A man sees something and thinks to himself, “This
thing that I see aims at being like some other thing, but it comes short and cannot be
like that other thing; it is inferior”; must not the man who thinks that have known at
some previous time that other thing, which he says that it resembles, and to which it is
inferior?
He must.
Well, have we ourselves had the same sort of feeling with reference to equal
things, and to abstract equality?
Yes, certainly.
Then we must have had knowledge of equality before we first saw equal things,
and perceived that they all strive to be like equality, and all come short of it.
That is so.
And we are agreed also that we have not, nor could we have, obtained the idea of
equality except from sight or touch or some other sense; the same is true of all the
senses.
Yes, Socrates, for the purposes of the argument that is so.
At any rate, it is by the senses that we must perceive that all sensible objects strive
to resemble absolute equality, and are inferior to it. Is not that so?
Yes.
Then before we began to see, and to hear, and to use the other senses, we must
have received the knowledge of the nature of abstract and real equality; otherwise we
could not have compared equal sensible objects with abstract equality, and seen that the
former in all cases strive to be like the latter, though they are always inferior to it?
That is the necessary consequence of what we have been saying, Socrates.
Did we not see, and hear, and possess the other senses as soon as we were born?
Yes, certainly.
And we must have received the knowledge of abstract equality before we had
these senses?
Yes.
Then, it seems, we must have received that knowledge before we were born?
It does.
Now if we received this knowledge before our birth, and were born with it, we
knew, both before and at the moment of our birth, not only the equal, and the greater,
and the less, but also everything of the same kind, did we not? Our present reasoning
does not refer only to equality. It refers just as much to absolute good, and absolute

d

e

73

b

c

d

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

50

e

76

b

c

d

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 50

PLATO

beauty, and absolute justice, and absolute holiness; in short, I repeat, to everything
which we mark with the name of the real, in the questions and answers of our dialectic.
So we must have received our knowledge of all realities before we were born.
That is so.
And we must always be born with this knowledge, and must always retain it
throughout life, if we have not each time forgotten it, after having received it. For to
know means to receive and retain knowledge, and not to have lost it. Do not we mean by
forgetting, the loss of knowledge, Simmias?
Yes, certainly, Socrates, he said.
But, I suppose, if it be the case that we lost at birth the knowledge which we
received before we were born, and then afterward, by using our senses on the objects of
sense, recovered the knowledge which we had previously possessed, then what we call
learning is the recovering of knowledge which is already ours. And are we not right in
calling that recollection?
Certainly.
For we have found it possible to perceive a thing by sight, or hearing, or any other
sense, and thence to form a notion of some other thing, like or unlike, which had been
forgotten, but with which this thing was associated. And therefore, I say, one of two
things must be true. Either we are all born with this knowledge and retain it all our life;
or, after birth, those whom we say are learning are only recollecting, and our knowledge
is recollection.
Yes indeed, that is undoubtedly true, Socrates.
Then which do you choose, Simmias? Are we born with knowledge or do we recollect the things of which we have received knowledge before our birth?
I cannot say at present, Socrates.
Well, have you an opinion about this question? Can a man who knows give an
account of what he knows, or not? What do you think about that?
Yes, of course he can, Socrates.
And do you think that everyone can give an account of the ideas of which we have
been speaking?
I wish I did, indeed, said Simmias, but I am very much afraid that by this time
tomorrow there will no longer be any man living able to do so as it should be done.
Then, Simmias, he said, you do not think that all men know these things?
Certainly not.
Then they recollect what they once learned?
Necessarily.
And when did our souls gain this knowledge? It cannot have been after we were
born men.
No, certainly not.
Then it was before?
Yes.
Then, Simmias, our souls existed formerly, apart from our bodies, and possessed
intelligence before they came into man’s shape.
Unless we receive this knowledge at the moment of birth, Socrates. That time still
remains.
Well, my friend, and at what other time do we lose it? We agreed just now that we
are not born with it; do we lose it at the same moment that we gain it, or can you suggest any other time?
I cannot, Socrates. I did not see that I was talking nonsense.

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 51

PHAEDO

51

Then, Simmias, he said, is not this the truth? If, as we are forever repeating, beauty,
and good, and the other ideas really exist, and if we refer all the objects of sensible perception to these ideas which were formerly ours, and which we find to be ours still, and
compare sensible objects with them, then, just as they exist, our souls must have existed
before ever we were born. But if they do not exist, then our reasoning will have been
thrown away. Is it so? If these ideas exist, does it not at once follow that our souls must
have existed before we were born, and if they do not exist, then neither did our souls?
Admirably put, Socrates, said Simmias. I think that the necessity is the same for
the one as for the other. The reasoning has reached a place of safety in the common
proof of the existence of our souls before we were born and of the existence of the ideas
of which you spoke. Nothing is so evident to me as that beauty, and good, and the other
ideas which you spoke of just now have a very real existence indeed. Your proof is quite
sufficient for me.
But what of Cebes? said Socrates. I must convince Cebes too.
I think that he is satisfied, said Simmias, though he is the most skeptical of men in
argument. But I think that he is perfectly convinced that our souls existed before we
were born.
But I do not think myself, Socrates, he continued, that you have proved that the
soul will continue to exist when we are dead. The common fear which Cebes spoke of,
that she [the soul] may be scattered to the winds at death, and that death may be the end
of her existence, still stands in the way. Assuming that the soul is generated and comes
together from some other elements, and exists before she ever enters the human body,
why should she not come to an end and be destroyed, after she has entered into the
body, when she is released from it?
You are right, Simmias, said Cebes. I think that only half the required proof has
been given. It has been shown that our souls existed before we were born; but it must
also be shown that our souls will continue to exist after we are dead, no less than that
they existed before we were born, if the proof is to be complete.
That has been shown already, Simmias and Cebes, said Socrates, if you will combine this reasoning with our previous conclusion, that all life is generated from death.
For if the soul exists in a previous state and if, when she comes into life and is born, she
can only be born from death, and from a state of death, must she not exist after death too,
since she has to be born again? So the point which you speak of has been already proved.
Still I think that you and Simmias would be glad to discuss this question further.
Like children, you are afraid that the wind will really blow the soul away and disperse her
when she leaves the body, especially if a man happens to die in a storm and not in a calm.
Cebes laughed and said, Try and convince us as if we were afraid, Socrates; or rather,
do not think that we are afraid ourselves. Perhaps there is a child within us who has these
fears. Let us try and persuade him not to be afraid of death, as if it were a bugbear.
You must charm him every day, until you have charmed him away, said Socrates.
And where shall we find a good charmer, Socrates, he asked, now that you are
leaving us?
Hellas is a large country, Cebes, he replied, and good men may doubtless be
found in it; and the nations of the Barbarians are many. You must search them all
through for such a charmer, sparing neither money nor labor; for there is nothing on
which you could spend money more profitably. And you must search for him among
yourselves too, for you will hardly find a better charmer than yourselves.
That shall be done, said Cebes. But let us return to the point where we left off, if
you will.

e

77

b

c

d

e

78

b

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

52

c

d

e

79

b

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 52

PLATO

Yes, I will: why not?
Very good, he replied.
Well, said Socrates, must we not ask ourselves this question? What kind of thing
is liable to suffer dispersion, and for what kind of thing have we to fear dispersion? And
then we must see whether the soul belongs to that kind or not, and be confident or afraid
about our own souls accordingly.
That is true, he answered.
Now is it not the compound and composite which is naturally liable to be dissolved in the same way in which it was compounded? And is not what is uncompounded alone not liable to dissolution, if anything is not?
I think that that is so, said Cebes.
And what always remains in the same state and unchanging is most likely to be
uncompounded, and what is always changing and never the same is most likely to be
compounded, I suppose?
Yes, I think so.
Now let us return to what we were speaking of before in the discussion, he said.
Does the being, which in our dialectic we define as meaning absolute existence, remain
always in exactly the same state, or does it change? Do absolute equality, absolute
beauty, and every other absolute existence, admit of any change at all? Or does absolute
existence in each case, being essentially uniform, remain the same and unchanging, and
never in any case admit of any sort or kind of change whatsoever?
It must remain the same and unchanging, Socrates, said Cebes.
And what of the many beautiful things, such as men, and horses, and garments,
and the like, and of all which bears the names of the ideas, whether equal, or beautiful,
or anything else? Do they remain the same or is it exactly the opposite with them? In
short, do they never remain the same at all, either in themselves or in their relations?
These things, said Cebes, never remain the same.
You can touch them, and see them, and perceive them with the other senses, while
you can grasp the unchanging only by the reasoning of the intellect. These latter are
invisible and not seen. Is it not so?
That is perfectly true, he said.
Let us assume then, he said, if you will, that there are two kinds of existence, the
one visible, the other invisible.
Yes, he said.
And the invisible is unchanging, while the visible is always changing.
Yes, he said again.
Are not we men made up of body and soul?
There is nothing else, he replied.
And which of these kinds of existence should we say that the body is most like,
and most akin to?
The visible, he replied; that is quite obvious.
And the soul? Is that visible or invisible?
It is invisible to man, Socrates, he said.
But we mean by visible and invisible, visible and invisible to man; do we not?
Yes; that is what we mean.
Then what do we say of the soul? Is it visible or not visible?
It is not visible.
Then is it invisible?
Yes.

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 53

PHAEDO

53

Then the soul is more like the invisible than the body; and the body is like the visible.
That is necessarily so, Socrates.
Have we not also said that, when the soul employs the body in any inquiry, and
makes use of sight, or hearing, or any other sense—for inquiry with the body means
inquiry with the senses—she is dragged away by it to the things which never remain the
same, and wanders about blindly, and becomes confused and dizzy, like a drunken man,
from dealing with things that are ever changing?
Certainly.
But when she investigates any question by herself, she goes away to the pure, and
eternal, and immortal, and unchangeable, to which she is akin, and so she comes to be
ever with it, as soon as she is by herself, and can be so; and then she rests from her wanderings and dwells with it unchangingly, for she is dealing with what is unchanging.
And is not this state of the soul called wisdom?
Indeed, Socrates, you speak well and truly, he replied.
Which kind of existence do you think from our former and our present arguments
that the soul is more like and more akin to?
I think, Socrates, he replied, that after this inquiry the very dullest man would
agree that the soul is infinitely more like the unchangeable than the changeable.
And the body?
That is like the changeable.
Consider the matter in yet another way. When the soul and the body are united,
nature ordains the one to be a slave and to be ruled, and the other to be master and to
rule. Tell me once again, which do you think is like the divine, and which is like the
mortal? Do you not think that the divine naturally rules and has authority, and that the
mortal naturally is ruled and is a slave?
I do.
Then which is the soul like?
That is quite plain, Socrates. The soul is like the divine, and the body is like the
mortal.
Now tell me, Cebes, is the result of all that we have said that the soul is most like
the divine, and the immortal, and the intelligible, and the uniform, and the indissoluble,
and the unchangeable; while the body is most like the human, and the mortal, and the
unintelligible, and the multiform, and the dissoluble, and the changeable? Have we any
other argument to show that this is not so, my dear Cebes?
We have not.
Then if this is so, is it not the nature of the body to be dissolved quickly, and of the
soul to be wholly or very nearly indissoluble?
Certainly.
You observe, he said, that after a man is dead, the visible part of him, his body,
which lies in the visible world and which we call the corpse, which is subject to dissolution and decomposition, is not dissolved and decomposed at once? It remains as it
was for a considerable time, and even for a long time, if a man dies with his body in
good condition and in the vigor of life. And when the body falls in and is embalmed,
like the mummies of Egypt, it remains nearly entire for an immense time. And should it
decay, yet some parts of it, such as the bones and muscles, may almost be said to be
immortal. Is it not so?
Yes.
And shall we believe that the soul, which is invisible, and which goes hence to a
place that is like herself, glorious, and pure, and invisible, to Hades, which is rightly

c

d

e

80

b

c

d

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

54

e

81

b

c

d

e

82

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 54

PLATO

called the unseen world, to dwell with the good and wise God, whither, if it be the will
of God, my soul too must shortly go—shall we believe that the soul, whose nature is so
glorious, and pure, and invisible, is blown away by the winds and perishes as soon as
she leaves the body, as the world says? Nay, dear Cebes and Simmias, it is not so. I will
tell you what happens to a soul which is pure at her departure, and which in her life has
had no intercourse that she could avoid with the body, and so draws after her, when she
dies, no taint of the body, but has shunned it, and gathered herself into herself, for such
has been her constant study—and that only means that she has loved wisdom rightly,
and has truly practiced how to die. Is not this the practice of death?
Yes, certainly.
Does not the soul, then, which is in that state, go away to the invisible that is like
herself, and to the divine, and the immortal, and the wise, where she is released from
error, and folly, and fear, and fierce passions, and all the other evils that fall to the lot of
men, and is happy, and for the rest of time lives in very truth with the gods, as they say
that the initiated do? Shall we affirm this, Cebes?
Yes, certainly, said Cebes.
But if she be defiled and impure when she leaves the body, from being ever with
it, and serving it and loving it, and from being besotted by it and by its desires and pleasures, so that she thinks nothing true but what is bodily and can be touched, and seen,
and eaten, and drunk, and used for men’s lusts; if she has learned to hate, and tremble at,
and fly from what is dark and invisible to the eye, and intelligible and apprehended by
philosophy—do you think that a soul which is in that state will be pure and without
alloy at her departure?
No, indeed, he replied.
She is penetrated, I suppose, by the corporeal, which the unceasing intercourse
and company and care of the body has made a part of her nature.
Yes.
And, my dear friend, the corporeal must be burdensome, and heavy, and earthy,
and visible; and it is by this that such a soul is weighed down and dragged back to the
visible world, because she is afraid of the invisible world of Hades, and haunts, it is
said, the graves and tombs, where shadowy forms of souls have been seen, which are
the phantoms of souls which were impure at their release and still cling to the visible;
which is the reason why they are seen.
That is likely enough, Socrates.
That is likely, certainly, Cebes; and these are not the souls of the good, but of the
evil, which are compelled to wander in such places as a punishment for the wicked lives
that they have lived; and their wanderings continue until, from the desire for the corporeal that clings to them, they are again imprisoned in a body.
And, he continued, they are imprisoned, probably, in the bodies of animals with
habits similar to the habits which were theirs in their lifetime.
What do you mean by that, Socrates?
I mean that men who have practiced unbridled gluttony, and wantonness, and drunkenness probably enter the bodies of asses and suchlike animals. Do you not think so?
Certainly that is very likely.
And those who have chosen injustice, and tyranny, and robbery enter the bodies
of wolves, and hawks, and kites. Where else should we say that such souls go?
No doubt, said Cebes, they go into such animals.
In short, it is quite plain, he said, whither each soul goes; each enters an animal
with habits like its own.

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 55

PHAEDO

55

Certainly, he replied, that is so.
And of these, he said, the happiest, who go to the best place, are those who have
practiced the popular and social virtues which are called temperance and justice, and
which come from habit and practice, without philosophy or reason.
And why are they the happiest?
Because it is probable that they return into a mild and social nature like their own,
such as that of bees, or wasps, or ants; or, it may be, into the bodies of men, and that
from them are made worthy citizens.
Very likely.
But none but the philosopher or the lover of knowledge, who is wholly pure when
he goes hence, is permitted to go to the race of the gods; and therefore, my friends,
Simmias and Cebes, the true philosopher is temperate and refrains from all the pleasures of the body, and does not give himself up to them. It is not squandering his substance and poverty that he fears, as the multitude and the lovers of wealth do; nor again
does he dread the dishonor and disgrace of wickedness, like the lovers of power and
honor. It is not for these reasons that he is temperate.
No, it would be unseemly in him if he were, Socrates, said Cebes.
Indeed it would, he replied, and therefore all those who have any care for their
souls, and who do not spend their lives in forming and molding their bodies, bid farewell
to such persons, and do not walk in their ways, thinking that they know not whither they
are going. They themselves turn and follow whithersoever philosophy leads them, for they
believe that they ought not to resist philosophy, or its deliverance and purification.
How, Socrates?
I will tell you, he replied. The lovers of knowledge know that when philosophy
receives the soul, she is fast bound in the body, and fastened to it; she is unable to contemplate what is, by herself, or except through the bars of her prison house, the body;
and she is wallowing in utter ignorance. And philosophy sees that the dreadful thing
about the imprisonment is that it is caused by lust, and that the captive herself is an
accomplice in her own captivity. The lovers of knowledge, I repeat, know that philosophy takes the soul when she is in this condition, and gently encourages her, and strives
to release her from her captivity, showing her that the perceptions of the eye, and the
ear, and the other senses are full of deceit, and persuading her to stand aloof from the
senses and to use them only when she must, and exhorting her to rally and gather herself together, and to trust only to herself and to the real existence which she of her own
self apprehends, and to believe that nothing which is subject to change, and which she
perceives by other faculties, has any truth, for such things are visible and sensible, while
what she herself sees is apprehended by reason and invisible. The soul of the true
philosopher thinks that it would be wrong to resist this deliverance from captivity, and
therefore she holds aloof, so far as she can, from pleasure, and desire, and pain, and
fear; for she reckons that when a man has vehement pleasure, or fear, or pain, or desire,
he suffers from them not merely the evils which might be expected, such as sickness or
some loss arising from the indulgence of his desires; he suffers what is the greatest and
last of evils, and does not take it into account.
What do you mean, Socrates? asked Cebes.
I mean that when the soul of any man feels vehement pleasure or pain, she is
forced at the same time to think that the object, whatever it be, of these sensations is the
most distinct and truest, when it is not.

*

*

*

b

c

d

e

83

b

c

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

56
114e

115

b

c

d

e

116

b

c

d

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 56

PLATO

. . . A man should be of good cheer about his soul if in his life he has renounced the
pleasures and adornments of the body, because they were nothing to him, and because
he thought that they would do him not good but harm; and if he has instead earnestly
pursued the pleasures of learning, and adorned his soul with the adornment of temperance, and justice, and courage, and freedom, and truth, which belongs to her and is her
own, and so awaits his journey to the other world, in readiness to set forth whenever fate
calls him. You, Simmias and Cebes, and the rest will set forth at some future day, each
at his own time. But me now, as a tragic poet would say, fate calls at once; and it is time
for me to betake myself to the bath. I think that I had better bathe before I drink the poison, and not give the women the trouble of washing my dead body.
When he had finished speaking Crito said, Be it so, Socrates. But have you any
commands for your friends or for me about your children, or about other things? How
shall we serve you best?
Simply by doing what I always tell you, Crito. Take care of your own selves, and
you will serve me and mine and yourselves in all that you do, even though you make no
promises now. But if you are careless of your own selves, and will not follow the path
of life which we have pointed out in our discussions both today and at other times, all
your promises now, however profuse and earnest they are, will be of no avail.
We will do our best, said Crito. But how shall we bury you?
As you please, he answered; only you must catch me first and not let me escape
you. And then he looked at us with a smile and said, My friends, I cannot convince Crito
that I am the Socrates who has been conversing with you and arranging his arguments
in order. He thinks that I am the body which he will presently see a corpse, and he asks
how he is to bury me. All the arguments which I have used to prove that I shall not
remain with you after I have drunk the poison, but that I shall go away to the happiness
of the blessed, with which I tried to comfort you and myself, have been thrown away on
him. Do you therefore be my sureties to him, as he was my surety at the trial, but in a
different way. He was surety for me then that I would remain; but you must be my
sureties to him that I shall go away when I am dead, and not remain with you; then he
will feel my death less; and when he sees my body being burned or buried, he will not
be grieved because he thinks that I am suffering dreadful things; and at my funeral he
will not say that it is Socrates whom he is laying out, or bearing to the grave, or burying.
For, dear Crito, he continued, you must know that to use words wrongly is not only a
fault in itself, it also creates evil in the soul. You must be of good cheer, and say that you
are burying my body; and you may bury it as you please and as you think right.
With these words he rose and went into another room to bathe. Crito went with
him and told us to wait. So we waited, talking of the argument and discussing it, and then
again dwelling on the greatness of the calamity which had fallen upon us: it seemed as if
we were going to lose a father and to be orphans for the rest of our lives. When he had
bathed, and his children had been brought to him—he had two sons quite little, and one
grown up—and the women of his family were come, he spoke with them in Crito’s presence, and gave them his last instructions; then he sent the women and children away and
returned to us. By that time it was near the hour of sunset, for he had been a long while
within. When he came back to us from the bath he sat down, but not much was said after
that. Presently the servant of the Eleven came and stood before him and said, “I know
that I shall not find you unreasonable like other men, Socrates. They are angry with me
and curse me when I bid them drink the poison because the authorities make me do it.
But I have found you all along the noblest and gentlest and best man that has ever come
here; and now I am sure that you will not be angry with me, but with those who you

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 57

PHAEDO

57

Jacques-Louis David, “The Death of Socrates.” (Oil on canvas, The Metropolitan Museum of Art,
Catharine Lorillard Wolfe Collection, Wolfe Fund, 1931. [31.45])

know are to blame. And so farewell, and try to bear what must be as lightly as you can;
you know why I have come.” With that he turned away weeping, and went out.
Socrates looked up at him and replied, Farewell, I will do as you say. Then he
turned to us and said, How courteous the man is! And the whole time that I have been
here, he has constantly come in to see me, and sometimes he has talked to me, and has
been the best of men; and now, how generously he weeps for me! Come, Crito, let us
obey him; let the poison be brought if it is ready, and if it is not ready, let it be prepared.
Crito replied: But, Socrates, I think that the sun is still upon the hills; it has not
set. Besides, I know that other men take the poison quite late, and eat and drink heartily,
and even enjoy the company of their chosen friends, after the announcement has been
made. So do not hurry; there is still time.
Socrates replied: And those whom you speak of, Crito, naturally do so, for they
think that they will be gainers by so doing. And I naturally shall not do so, for I think
that I should gain nothing by drinking the poison a little later, but my own contempt for
so greedily saving a life which is already spent. So do not refuse to do as I say.
Then Crito made a sign to his slave who was standing by; and the slave went out,
and after some delay returned with the man who was to give the poison, carrying it prepared in a cup. When Socrates saw him, he asked, You understand these things, my
good man, what have I to do?
You have only to drink this, he replied, and to walk about until your legs feel
heavy, and then lie down; and it will act of itself.
With that he handed the cup to Socrates, who took it quite cheerfully, Echecrates,
without trembling, and without any change of color or of feature, and looked up at the

e

117

b

M01_BAIR3861_06_SE_C01.QXD

58

c

d

e

118

12/8/09

12:22 PM

Page 58

PLATO

man with that fixed glance of his, and asked, What say you to making a libation from
this draught? May I, or not?
We only prepare so much as we think sufficient, Socrates, he answered.
I understand, said Socrates. But I suppose that I may, and must, pray to the gods
that my journey hence may be prosperous. That is my prayer; may it be so. With these
words he put the cup to his lips and drank the poison quite calmly and cheerfully.
Till then most of us had been able to control our grief fairly well; but when we
saw him drinking and then the poison finished, we could do so no longer: my tears came
fast in spite of myself, and I covered my face and wept for myself; it was not for him,
but at my own misfortune in losing such a friend. Even before that Crito had been
unable to restrain his tears, and had gone away; and Apollodorus, who had never once
ceased weeping the whole time, burst into a loud wail and made us one and all break
down by his sobbing, except Socrates himself.
What are you doing, my friends? he exclaimed. I sent away the women chiefly in
order that they might not behave in this way; for I have heard that a man should die in
silence. So calm yourselves and bear up.
When we heard that, we were ashamed, and we ceased from weeping. But he
walked about, until he said that his legs were getting heavy, and then he lay down on his
back, as he was told. And the man who gave the poison began to examine his feet and
legs from time to time. Then he pressed his foot hard and asked if there was any feeling
in it, and Socrates said, No; and then his legs, and so higher and higher, and showed us
that he was cold and stiff. And Socrates felt himself and said that when it came to his
heart, he should be gone. He was already growing cold about the groin, when he uncovered his face, which had been covered, and spoke for the last time. Crito, he said, I owe
a cock to Asclepius; do not forget to pay it.*
It shall be done, replied Crito. Is there anything else that you wish? He made no
answer to this question; but after a short interval there was a movement, and the man
uncovered him, and his eyes were fixed. Then Crito closed his mouth and his eyes.
Such was the end, Echecrates, of our friend, a man, I think, who was the wisest
and justest, and the best man I have ever known.

*[Asclepius was the Greek god of healing. When one recovered from an illness it was customary to offer
a cock as a sacrifice, so Socrates’ last words imply that death is a kind of healing. See, for instance 66b ff., 67c.]
