Architecture - Residential Architecture of the 19th and 20th Centuries
American architecture has developed and evolved since the first permanent buildings were
constructed in the United States. Many ideas were transmitted from Europe and across this
country through travel, architectural handbooks, and periodicals. Dates and style labels are
used as general guidelines to distinguish various design forms. Care must be used in
attaching design labels to specific buildings. Few examples of pure styles exist.
Before 1870, the major design resource for builders were pattern books that illustrated
plans and elevations of buildings. Often houses were built with parts from more than one
pattern, and favorite details of several styles were combined. In addition, many styles
received local variations in response to different climates, availability of building materials,
and personal needs. In many cases, designs continued to be built in some areas of the
country long after they were considered out of fashion in others. Dates used i n this section
reflect the appearance of the design in Illinois.

Gothic Revival (1830s–1870s)

Gothic Revival Style
The Gothic revival looked back to medieval cathedrals in France and England built between
the eleventh and fourteenth centuries. When the style was first introduced in the United
States in the 1830s, it was primarily used for church structures; it was later popularized for
private residences.

Gothic buildings are typically asymmetrical and are characterized by Gothic (pointed)
windows. Although stone was occasionally used, most houses were built of wood. The
development of cutting tools led to the creation of decorative wood trim known as
bargeboard. Gables, towers, and elaborate wood details added to the gingerbread effect.
Ornament was three-dimensional, carved and turned, as well as cut with a scroll saw. In

Oak Park currently, most bargeboard has been removed, but some pointed arch windows
and elaborate gable decorations still exist.

Italianate (1850–1880s)
The Italianate style was derived from farm houses and villas in northern Italy.
Characteristics include brackets supporting overhanging eaves on shallow hip or steep
gable roofs, often with a tower or belvedere. Balconies, bay windows, and verandas were
also common. Windows were rounded or had a cornice at the head.

Second Empire (1855–1885)

Second Empire Style

This style was considered the high style of the Victorian era. It is derived from Baron
Haussmann’s architecture for the redevelopment of Paris during the reign of Napoleon III.

The two international expositions in Paris in 1855 and 1867 brought many visit ors to Paris,
and subsequently the style was popularized.
The characteristic feature is the Mansard roof (named after the French architect Francois
Mansart), which provided an extra floor in the attic space of the building but avoided the
city tax charged for each floor of a building. Other identifiable elements are prominent
cornices and brackets (usually placed symmetrically on the mansard roof), classical
decorations, arched or rounded windows, and towers extending above cornices.

Late Picturesque Periods
Stick (1870–1880s)

Stick Style

The transition from timber to balloon frame created an interest in the structural system of a
building. The Stick style expressed this unseen frame in the use of vertical and horizontal
stripping on the exterior walls, with the diagonal stick work representing the trusses and
bracing of the steep and jagged roofs. The areas between these strips were frequently
filled with a variety of textural decoration, including clapboard and sculptured shingles, and
work of the lathe and scroll saw. The tall thin windows and doors appear to fill voids
between the members of the frame rather than as holes punched in the facade. This
emphasis on the skeleton frame was the beginning of the structural honesty later espoused
by Louis Sullivan and Wright. Corner towers and truncated corners were common. Plans
were complex with boxlike rooms against which Wright later rebelled. Verandas were
extensive and supported on wooden posts. Facades were flat without curving lines.

Victorian Eclectic (Queen Anne) (1870s–1900s)

Victorian Eclectic Style
The designs labeled “Queen Anne“ in England have very little to do with the architecture
built during the reign of Queen Anne (1702–1714). Mark Girouard in his book Sweetness
and Light describes English Queen Anne designs as “an architectural cocktail with a little
genuine Queen Anne, a little Dutch, a little Flemish, a squeeze of Robert Adams, a
generous dash of Wren and a touch of Francois I, all mixed with skill and gaiety.“1
The style in America had even less to do with the reign of Queen Anne and was considered
the characteristic style of the “gilded age.” In America, Queen Anne designs were derived
from two half-timber houses built by Great Britain at the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition
in 1876. The plans of these houses, not the elevations, interested Americans. The plans did
not come from the Queen Anne period, but from the Elizabethan era when the entrance
hall, complete with fireplace and staircase, served as the circulation center for surrounding
spaces. Rooms opened onto the hall and varied in size, shape, and location according to
function.
As in England, the spirit of combining design elements from many earlier styles is present.
Significant characteristics include a complex plan, asymmetrical facade, irregular massing,
turrets, porches, wings, pinnacles, and prominent decorated chimneys. The building was
surfaced with a variety of materials, often with thin clapboard on the first floor, and “fish scale“ or other patterned shingle siding on the gables. Ornament was fussy, of small scale,
and sometimes classical. Bay windows, with plate or leaded glass, were common. Gable
ends were elaborately decorated. It was an exuberant style creating a feeling of complex
ornateness. Some historians categorize the most extreme and heavy-handed ornament of
the Queen Anne period as “Eastlake.“
A typical Queen Anne home in the Midwest would be a large, asymmetrical home of wood
set on a stone foundation with a porch running across the front and around one side to the

dining room door. Complexity was achieved in the roof, dormers, and gables that projected
over bays of windows of varied size and shape.

Shingle Style (1880s–1890)

Shingle Style

This label was applied by Vincent Scully, art historian, to describe a mutation of the
American Queen Anne that greatly increased the openness and flow of interior space. This
style first appeared in New England; architects designed summer cottages for prosperous
families. It is influenced by the simplicity of the colonial farmhouse. Unlike the Queen Anne
style, gambrel roofs with short upper slopes are more prevalent; there is no applied
decoration, and there is harmony among the complex parts unified by the simplicity of the
unpainted shingles that wrap around the entire house. From Victorian designs the style
borrowed wide porches, shingled surfaces and complex asymmetrical forms. From the
Colonial Revival, it adapted gambrel roofs, lean-to additions, classical columns, and
Palladian and diamond-paned casement windows. From the Romanesque Revival, it
borrowed rounded arches, massive stone on the lower stories and an emphasis on irregular
sculpted forms.
The "living hall" became the center of the house with the other spaces grouped a round it.
There was a greater feeling that the exterior was shaped by the spaces within. The careful
placement of the sheltered porches and verandas continued the flow of the interior space to
the outdoors.
H. H. Richardson (better known for his Romanesque-style designs), Bruce Price, and the
New York firm of McKim, Mead and White designed Shingle-style houses on the East
Coast. Joseph Lyman Silsbee, Frank Lloyd Wright’s first Chicago employer, popularized the
style in the Midwest. The shingle style was the forerunner of the developments Wright later
made in domestic architecture. Wright’s design for his own home indicates his awareness
of Price’s work.

Romanesque Revival. Also called Richardsonian Romanesque (1880–1890s)

Richardsonian Romanesque Style

The revival of Romanesque architecture began in religious architecture during the 1850s
and 1860s and spread to domestic architecture with the work of the Boston architect H.H.
Richardson. Characteristics include large rough-faced, rusticated stones; deep window
openings; steep gabled roofs; and towers, dormers, and round-arched entrances. In
Richardson’s era, a critic remarked that these structures make people feel secure and
respectable. As a result, the design form was considered suitable for libraries, railway
stations, churches, and banks as its massive rough masonry surfaces projected a sense of
strength and permanence.
Glessner House (1800 South Prairie Avenue, Chicago, Illinois) by Richardson, is perhaps
the best known residential example in the Chicago area, if not the entire country. Most Oak
Park homes of the period were more modest and built of wood. Consequently, there are no
pure examples of Romanesque Revival in the neighborhood, but the detailing on a number
of rowhouses and apartments shows the influence of the Romanesque style.
Colonial Revival (1890–1900s)

The 1876 Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia woke America to its own heritage. People
began to look toward their own earlier architectural designs for inspiration, and an interest
in colonial designs emerged. While some houses were accurate copies of earlier buildings,
most Colonial Revival houses used only details from the past. Characteristics included
symmetrical facades, dormers, double-hung sash windows, Palladian windows, and other
classical details.

20th Century Architecture

Bungalow (1900–1940s)

Bungalow Style
The word ‘bungalow’ originated with the British in 19th-century India. It was derived from a
Hindustani word ‘bangla’ and referred to a one-story house with a surrounding porch and
deep overhanging eaves. In America, the bungalow began with small, one -story seaside
cottages that were constructed out of local materials to harmonize with the landscape.
Cobblestones were often used for foundations and chimneys. Walls, whether clapboard,
shingles or brick, were a natural shade of brown. Low hipped roofs had wide overhangs
that displayed exposed rafters over front porches. Ornament was minimal. Bungalow
designs were reproduced throughout the country. Magazines and books published working
plans and designs that people could order. Sears offered several models through their mail order catalogs that provided not only plans but also precut lumber, nails, doors, and other
building materials shipped to the site via railroad. Many documented Sears houses survive
throughout the Western suburbs in towns like Riverside, Elmhurst, and Downers Grove.
More than 100,000 bungalows were built in and around Chicago during the 1920s. These
“Chicago bungalows” supplied affordable housing to working people living in cities. While
there is variety in the designs of these houses, most are built of brick and are long, narrow,
one-and-a-half story structures with many windows. All Chicago bungalows ar e of this
same basic form, yet the wide variety of texture, color, and design elements allowed for
subtle individuality. More elaborate versions included decorative art glass, octagonal fr ont
sunrooms and tile roofs.

American Foursquare (1910–1920s)
The nationwide sale of pattern books and mail-order catalogs made it possible for the same
house designs to be built anywhere in America. One house form that became extremely
popular was the American Foursquare style. There were many variations of the boxli ke
house with hipped roof and centered dormers that provided a maximum amount of space
with the least amount of building materials. The limited detail of the simple and practical
Foursquare could be modified with Classical, Colonial Revival or Prairie deta ils.

Eclectic Residence (1920–1945)
The revival of earlier styles came into fashion as they had in the 1890s and 1900s. A small scale English country house could sit next to a six-room French chateau with turret and
slate roof, across the street from a chalet that was next to a hacienda. The logic of a plan
was no longer expressed on the exterior. The same basic plan could be covered with a
Dutch Colonial or Spanish exterior. This produced a semblance of individuality without risk
of eccentricity.
ECLECTIC ELEVATION FEATURES

© 1973 John G. Thorpe

ECLECTIC FLOOR PLAN

International Style (1920–1970s)

International Style

The publication of Wright’s work in the Wasmuth Portfolio and the design of factories and
grain elevators built in the United States were a great stimulus and inspiration for European
architects, whose subsequent experimentation with fully integrated architecture ultimately
gave rise to what became the International Style. The term has been loosely applied to

modern works created out of steel and glass. In 1932, Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip
Johnson published their book The International Style, Architecture Since 1922, and this
was the first time an American artistic development had influenced Europe. The cycle was
completed when the leading members of the European architectural community, who were
fleeing the Third Reich, immigrated to the United States. They came in the mid -1920s to
head architectural schools—Ludwig Mies van der Rohe at Illinois Institute of Technology
and Walter Gropius, joined by Marcel Breuer, at Harvard. New building materials served as
design inspiration: steel or reinforced concrete was used to create flat -roofed, boxlike
houses that included large-pane windows. The typically white houses emphasized volume,
regularity and order and avoided any applied ornamentation.

Post World War II (1945–1970s)
Little building went on during World War II. When house construction resumed, designs
based on historic precedent were largely abandoned in favor of variations of modern
designs. Houses included simpler lines and less ornament as a result of the modern
movement. Faint reminiscences of colonial designs were used, including double -hung sash
windows and shutters. Other characteristics include aluminum, brick, or wide wood siding,
broad overhanging eaves and attached garages. Lines from ranch and split -level houses
popular in the 1950s and 1960s were derived from the Prairie and Usonian house designs.

Postmodern (1970s+)
Beginning in the 1960s, disenchantment with the International Style of architecture grew
and architects began to search for alternatives to modern designs. In its heyday, modern
architecture was considered democratic, impartial, efficient and, rational. Cr itics charged
modern architecture with three shortcomings:
1. It failed to communicate in meaningful symbols.
2. Its claim of universality means only that it is specific to no place or people.
3. Buildings often failed to serve their function because they were overbuilt or planned
without sufficient investigation of needs.
Architects such as Robert Venturi and Philip Johnson began to borrow elements from
previous design traditions and applied them in new and innovative ways. Traditional
ornament can be found at various scales in nontraditional ways. Geometric window
openings are also common. The Postmodern-style houses often reflect the best
characteristics of neighboring buildings by using them in spirited and creative manners,
although the style has also generated considerable criticism.

