China’s climate change policies:
actors and drivers

Lisa Williams
July 2014

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

The Lowy Institute for International Policy is an independent policy think
tank. Its mandate ranges across all the dimensions of international policy
debate in Australia – economic, political and strategic – and it is not
limited to a particular geographic region. Its two core tasks are to:
• produce distinctive research and fresh policy options for Australia’s
international policy and to contribute to the wider international debate.
• promote discussion of Australia’s role in the world by providing an
accessible and high-quality forum for discussion of Australian
international relations through debates, seminars, lectures, dialogues
and conferences.

This publication is supported by the Lowy Institute − Rio Tinto China
Fellowship.
The views expressed in this paper are the author's own and do not
reflect the views of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet or
the Australian Government.

Lowy Institute Analyses are short papers analysing recent international
trends and events and their policy implications.
The views expressed in this paper are entirely the author’s own and
not those of the Lowy Institute for International Policy.

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
China, the world’s largest greenhouse gas emitter, has a poor reputation
on environmental issues and was seen to be obstructive at the
Copenhagen climate change talks in 2009. Yet paradoxically, China has
invested significant resources into policies which reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. These policies have been driven primarily by domestic
considerations – energy demand, smog, and economic restructuring –
but international image has also been a factor. The public outcry in
recent years against air pollution has given urgency to the need for a
cleaner growth path.
There are a growing number of actors within China who seek to
influence climate change policy, although not always in a positive way. In
particular, provincial governments and experts are gaining more
influence over policy. As the range of players broadens, this opens up
new opportunities for better international engagement with China on
climate change. Foreign governments would do well to develop longterm relationships with the right policy actors if they wish to have
influence on China’s green growth trajectory.

1

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

China is the world’s largest greenhouse emitter. It has a poor reputation
on environmental issues, and it was seen to play a negative role at the
Copenhagen climate change negotiations in 2009. Yet there is no
question that China will be central to any serious global effort to tackle
climate change. In the same way that China’s economy has immense
influence on the health of the global economy, China’s attitude to climate
change and its environmental policies will have major implications for the
health of the world’s environment.
As the world approaches a new round of global climate change
negotiations in 2015 in Paris, it is critically important to understand the
key actors and drivers that shape these policies. The global force of
international climate change negotiations will touch even those countries
which, like Australia, rank relatively low in terms of total greenhouse gas
emissions.
This Analysis is based on some 25 interviews with some of China’s key
climate change policy-makers, experts and observers in early 2014. Its
goal is to provide a deeper understanding of the distinctive
characteristics, constraints and opportunities of the Chinese climate
change policy-making environment.

CHINA’S ‘CLIMATE CHANGE’ POLICIES
China’s carbon dioxide emissions dwarf the contributions of all other
nations, at more than a quarter of the world total.1 The country’s total
emissions are already more than 20 times greater than Australia’s
(although its per capita emissions remain far lower, with each Australian
consuming around three times more than each Chinese).2 If current
policies remain unchanged, by 2020 China’s emissions will be more than
double that of the second biggest emitter, the United States.3 Its climate
change policies are therefore vitally important for both the greenhouse
gas mitigation effort and, because of the emissions-energy-economy
nexus, for the world economy.
China is accused of avoiding its responsibilities to reduce emissions. But
the country has made significant efforts in recent years to put in place
policies that have the effect of reducing greenhouse gas emissions, even
if carbon mitigation is not their primary driver.
Until recently, the key policies relevant to climate change were those
related to energy efficiency and energy supply. Over the last three
decades, most of China’s Five Year Plans (the country’s principal
economic policy statements) featured goals to reduce energy intensity
per unit of gross domestic product (GDP).4 Support for renewable
energy began in the mid-1990s.5 The Renewable Energy Law,
established in 2005 and revised in 2009, set a national renewable
energy target, required grid companies to connect renewable energies,

2

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

established feed-in tariffs and provided for government financial
support.6
Figure 1:

Source: US Energy Information Administration, "Total Carbon Dioxide Emissions from the
Consumption of Energy (Million Metric Tons)," in International Energy Outlook 2013 (2013).

Figure 2:

Source: US Energy Information Administration, "World carbon dioxide emissions by region,
Reference case, 2009-2040," in International Energy Outlook 2013 (2013).

The 11th Five Year Plan, covering the period 2006 to 2010,
demonstrated a growing political consensus that economic growth could
not continue to come at the expense of environmental degradation. The
government set its first quantitative and binding energy target to reduce
energy intensity (energy consumption per unit of GDP) by 20 per cent.

3

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

The 11th Five Year Plan also set goals for increasing ‘non-fossil’ –
renewable and nuclear – energy to 10 per cent of primary energy, and
reducing major pollutants by 10 per cent. By the end of the plan period,
the pollution targets were met, but energy intensity and non-fossil energy
fell just short of the goals.7

Figure 3:

Source: OECD (2014), "Country statistical profile: China", Country statistical profiles.

In November 2009, just ahead of the UNFCCC Copenhagen Climate
Change Conference, then Premier Wen Jiabao announced the
centrepiece of China’s climate change policy – an unconditional
commitment to cut its emissions per unit of GDP 40-45 per cent from
2005 to 2020. China also pledged to increase the contribution of nonfossil energy to 15 per cent of the energy mix by 2020.8 To give effect to
China’s commitments, the current 12th Five Year Plan is the first plan to
set a carbon intensity target (carbon dioxide emissions per unit of GDP).9
Subsequently, the Government announced a series of measures to help
meet these commitments. These included: pilot emissions trading
schemes; energy and coal consumption caps; carbon capture and
storage projects; support for improving efficiency of coal-fired
generators; renewable energy projects; residential energy use caps; and
support for smart grids and electric vehicles.10

4

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

Figure 4:

Source: OECD (2014), "Country statistical profile: China", Country statistical profiles.

Table 1:

Source: Joanna Lewis, "Energy and Climate Goals of China’s 12th Five-Year Plan," (2011),
http://www.c2es.org/international/key-country-policies/china/energy-climate-goals-twelfthfive-year-plan.

The jury is still out on whether China will meet its 12th Five Year Plan
commitments. In the first two years of the plan, carbon intensity dropped
6.6 per cent, energy intensity fell by 5.5 per cent, and non-fossil energy
increased to 9.4 per cent. The figures were lower than the State
Council’s expectations, and it remains to be seen whether the final
figures will match the targets.11

5

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

Regardless of whether it meets the goals set out in the 12th Five Year
Plan, however, China has made significant inroads in reducing businessas-usual greenhouse gas emissions. Absent a counterfactual scenario,
we do not know exactly how much greenhouse gas emission has been
avoided, but we can look at other indicators. China has developed a
renewable energy industry that was virtually non-existent a decade ago.
It is now the largest single country investor in both new renewable
energy capacity and total capacity (even excluding hydropower).12 It now
has 20 nuclear power reactors in operation and another 28 are being
constructed.13
Figure 5:

Source: Frankfurt School-UNEP Centre/BNEF, "Global Trends in Renewable Energy
Investment 2014," (2014).

Figure 6:

Source REN21. "Renewables 2014 Global Status Report." 2014.

6

It is now the largest
single country investor in
both new renewable
energy capacity and total
capacity (even excluding
hydropower).

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

China’s energy intensity has also declined rapidly, though it still remains
far higher than the world average (see Figure 4). The average energy
efficiency of China’s coal-fired power stations increased from 31 per cent
in 2000 to 37 per cent in 2010 while America’s remained flat at
33 per cent.14 Its pilot emissions trading schemes cover 700 million
tonnes of carbon dioxide emissions, second only to the European Union
scheme, which covers 2.1 billion tonnes.15 Only a few years ago, China
was talking about carbon emissions peaking around 2050; now, some of
China’s most prominent experts think it possible to peak around 2025.16
The 40-45 per cent carbon intensity target was the government’s first
attempt to directly address climate change. It marked a crucial change in
China’s attitude towards carbon reduction. These changes were
motivated by a range of actors and drivers, and understanding who and
what these are is key to understanding both the constraints upon China’s
climate change policy and also the opportunities for more positive
change.

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE ACTORS
While the central government remains dominant, China has a range of
actors that influence climate change decision-makers. The traditional
power brokers of policy remain difficult to access and influence, but a
range of new actors are emerging who offer new opportunities to shape
Chinese climate change policy.
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
The central government retains tight control over most policy decisions
in China, including climate change policy. As climate change has
emerged as an important issue, it has come under the closer control and
scrutiny of China’s senior leaders. The government expects to have a
controlling stake in the new ‘strategic industries’ spelled out in its 12th
Five Year Plan, which include energy saving and environmental
protection, new energy and clean energy vehicles.17
The primary leadership body for policy on climate change is the National
Leading Group for Addressing Climate Change, chaired by
Premier Li Keqiang. It includes almost all ministers of the central
government.18 The National Leading Group on Energy Saving and
Pollution Reduction has the same membership.19 The Leading Groups
are similar to cabinet committees in an Australian context.
The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) is the
primary government institution responsible for climate change
governance. The NDRC is also one of China’s most powerful policymaking bodies in the central government – a ‘super ministry’– with
responsibility for all policies related to economic and social development,
including the writing of China’s five year plans. In reality, NDRC’s power
status derives primarily from its role in approving projects.20

7

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

Although the NDRC remains pre-eminent, other government players
have begun to vie for influence in shaping climate change policy. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and NDRC competed for influence in the
Copenhagen international climate change negotiations.21 More recently,
the Ministry of Finance has backed a national carbon tax over a carbon
trading scheme because a tax would be under its control, not the
NDRC’s. The NDRC supports emissions trading for similar reasons.22
NDRC’s role is also being challenged by the Ministry of Environmental
Protection, whose responsibilities previously excluded climate change,
but focused instead on other types of air and water pollutants. As
reducing smog becomes a higher priority for the government, it is
becoming increasingly difficult to exclude the Ministry of Environmental
Protection from climate change policy-making, which further complicates
what is already a confused and poorly coordinated policy-making
arrangement.23 Still, it is likely NDRC will continue to be the supreme
climate change authority for the foreseeable future, given its central role
as a coordinating body.
Figure7:

Source: Adapted from Stephen Tsang and Ans Kolk, "The evolution of Chinese policies and
governance structures on environment, energy and climate," Environmental Policy and
Governance 20, no. 3 (2010).

8

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

The power of officials and institutions involved in decision-making is not
only distinguished by hierarchical rank (as depicted in Figure 7), but also
by function and guanxi – informal relationships. For example, because
the NDRC has control over planning and project approvals, members of
the NDRC can sometimes wield as much power as the State Council.24
As we will see below, members of China’s expert community and stateowned enterprises (SOEs) exercise influence through their guanxi with
senior central government members.
EXPERTS

Academics and members
of think tanks and
research institutes “coproduce the Chinese
climate change position
and strategy” alongside
the government organs.

One major gap in this complex governance arrangement is the lack of
analytical capacity on climate change issues. The NDRC is, for example,
notoriously understaffed.25 As a result, one feature of China’s climate
change policy-making scene is the significant role played by experts
from outside the bureaucracy. Academics and members of think tanks
and research institutes “co-produce the Chinese climate change position
and strategy” alongside the government organs.26 They are regularly
called upon to provide independent advice to senior leaders.
The central government’s National Advisory Committee on Climate
Change comprises China’s most influential experts on this issue. The
Committee has a direct role in policy development, including for
international negotiations and five year plans. It reports directly to the
NDRC and the State Council. Outside of this formal group, China’s
experts are often asked to appear in person at internal meetings and at
the National Leading Groups. They also conduct government-sponsored
research, appear in the national and foreign media, and meet regularly
with relevant departments and the NDRC.27
The key expert players are all in Beijing, and for the most part their
influence is derived from personal authority gained through connections
and experience, not from their position or organisation. However, they
tend to work in a small set of institutions, including Tsinghua University,
Renmin University, the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences (CASS),
the State Council Development Research Center (DRC), the National
Center for Climate Change Strategy and International Cooperation
(NCSC), and the Energy Research Institute (ERI).28 The government
generally supports the independence of these experts, which allows for a
high-quality (but not necessarily transparent) debate within these
circles.29
Australian and international universities, think tanks and institutions
have already seen that developing long-term relationships with the
expert community can yield more influence and better outcomes. For
example, international think tanks and non-government organisations
have held a degree of policy influence when they have maintained an
influential, well-connected Chinese expert on their full-time staff.30
Foreign governments have also tapped into this source of expertise

9

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

and influence for development, research and policy projects. Experts
are now in such demand that the mark of a successful international
climate change project now is the degree to which the identified
experts are involved.31
China’s small expert community on climate change is widening as more
climate change and energy specialists come through the academic
ranks. The central government is generous with funding for climate
change related research, which has created a burgeoning community of
young, well-connected researchers poised to replace the current
generation of influential experts.32 Developing relationships with this new
generation of experts will be one way to shape Chinese policy-making
on climate change in the future.
Nevertheless, while these experts are all influential, they are still only
advisers; the government decides whether to act on their advice. One
prominent member of this community explained that experts have most
traction with political leaders when they stand united, which is as
uncommon among academics and think tanks in China as it is in other
countries.33
PROVINCIAL GOVERNMENTS
China’s climate change, energy and environment policies are
implemented through a cascading target responsibility system. The
central government sets the overall targets, the most important of which
are laid out in Five Year Plans. Then the targets are disaggregated to
each province. The process of disaggregating targets is theoretically a
central government decision based on modelling from experts, but in
reality each province negotiates intensely with the central government to
ensure their interests are reflected in the final decision.34 Provincial
governments are relatively senior, enjoying the same administrative rank
as ministries, and have substantial influence over policy development
through their guanxi.35
Provincial governments are then free to choose what policy mechanisms
they will use to implement a target and how strictly they implement it,
subject to some constraints.36 The central government evaluates
performance of provincial leaders on the basis of their ability to achieve
targets across a range of policy areas, and accords promotions to those
who have performed well. Thus individual career success is linked to
their ability to achieve the targets.37

10

…in reality each province
negotiates intensely with
the central government
to ensure their interests
are reflected in the final
decision.

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

Figure 8: 12th Five Year Plan carbon and energy reduction targets by province

Overall targets 
Carbon intensity: 17 per cent by 2015 
Energy intensity: 16 per cent by 2015 
Source: Da Zhang, Marco Springmann, and Valerie Karplus, Equity and Emissions Trading
in China, (MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, 2014),
http://globalchange.mit.edu/files/document/MITJPSPGC_Rpt257.pdf.and Barbara Finamore
et al., "Province-by-Province Details of China's Five-Year Energy and Environment
Priorities," Switchboard (2011), http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/bfinamore/province_by_pr

To get around central
government anti-pollution
measures, local officials
have falsified
information, shut down
enforcement equipment,
and secretly reopened
factories.

ovince_details_o.html.

China’s unitary system of government implies provinces are subordinate
to the central government. In reality, the central government faces a
number of difficult challenges convincing provincial governments to
enforce its targets and policies. Provinces have tended to prioritise
economic growth over the central government’s environmental goals.38
To get around central government anti-pollution measures, local officials
have falsified information, shut down enforcement equipment, and
secretly reopened factories.39
One reason for these competing incentives is the central government’s
performance evaluation system, which excluded environmental goals

11

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

altogether until the 11th Five Year Plan.40 Even now performance
assessment still very much emphasises economic growth over
environmental targets.41 Another reason is that provincial governments
generally lack understanding and knowledge of climate change issues
and policies.42 Corrupt local officials can also be swayed by bribes.
Provincial governments’ incentives are beginning to change as the
problematic environmental outcomes of unrestrained economic
development become more obvious, and as the central government puts
more effort into its environmental and anti-corruption agendas. In April
2014, the Standing Committee of the National People’s Congress
approved a new Environment Protection Law, which significantly
increases the punishments for violations of environmental laws, allows
for more civil society participation in environmental lawsuits and
formalises a system of environmental performance evaluation for local
officials. If implemented effectively, which is still very questionable, the
new law will go a long way towards improving the incentives of provincial
governments.43
Local government capacity is also beginning to improve after concerted
central government and international capacity-building efforts, although
there is still a long way to go.44 The more developed eastern provinces
now support balancing economic growth with environmental protection.45
A key question is whether the poorer west will follow their lead, or
whether the environmental problems will merely be displaced as heavy
industry and electricity generation migrate west.46
In the east, therefore, foreigners have recently been able to influence
policy development and implementation by engaging provincial
governments on sophisticated policy measures. For example, the
provinces developing pilot emissions trading schemes have relied
enormously on foreign experts (consultants, foreign governments and
think tanks) to develop their policies. Australia, the European Union, the
World Bank and the Asian Development Bank have all been involved in
the development of China’s carbon trading policies.47 This sort of policy
engagement is likely to grow deeper and more complex as China’s
interest in protection of its environment escalates. In China’s west,
foreigners need to take a more basic approach focused on foundational
capacity building to improve understanding of environmental and climate
change issues.
STATE-OWNED ENTERPRISES
Large, centrally owned SOEs remain a significant factor in many
government decisions, including with respect to climate change.48 Many
of China’s largest emitters are SOEs, and the energy sector is almost
completely dominated by them.49
The relationship between the largest SOEs and the central and
provincial governments is complex and opaque. Even though they are

12

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

Large SOEs often have
higher-level contacts in
the Party than the
government agencies
which regulate them.

no longer officially bureaucrats, some SOEs are led by very senior
members of the Communist Party of China. The heads of the biggest
SOEs have equal administrative rank to ministers and provincial
governors, and have direct lines of contact with the central Chinese
leadership and provincial leaders.50 Large SOEs often have higher-level
contacts in the Party than the government agencies which regulate
them.51
SOEs rely on the central government to give them preferential access to
goods and financial markets, and for promotion within the Party.52 In
return, the central government expects SOEs to play their part in
implementing the government’s economic, social, national security and
environmental policies. For example, SOEs played a large role in
achieving the energy efficiency gains in the 11th Five Year Plan.53
Further complicating SOE-central government relations is the increasing
reliance of SOEs on provincial governments for project approvals as a
result of the central government’s decentralisation drives. SOEs thus
have a more complex set of stakeholders to negotiate. Yet they have
also found greater opportunities to shape policy. The central government
is generally increasing the time and effort it spends on consulting
affected parties before it makes a decision.54 SOEs are also gaining
influence in western provinces, which are keen to attract SOE projects
for economic growth.55
The same channels of authority and guanxi through which the
government exercises control over SOEs are used by SOEs to influence
government policy development. Representatives of SOEs often speak
directly with their Party and government contacts about policy decisions.
They recruit (on high salaries) ex-members of the central government to
lobby on their behalf.56 SOEs also attempt to leverage the influence of
experts by offering them lucrative research contracts or board
memberships. Interviewees stressed that experts remain fiercely
independent, but these relationships probably have some effect on
experts’ advice.57
The extent of SOEs’ influence is difficult to assess, not least because the
government and SOEs often have similar goals, such as improving
energy efficiency and increasing international market penetration.58 But
interviewees said the influence of SOEs over policy was significant and
often favoured the status quo.59 SOEs have already delayed the central
government’s energy intensity targets.60 China’s wind energy capacity
has underperformed in part because SOEs controlling the energy grid
have resisted adding intermittent renewable energy to the grids.61 SOEs
have even been blamed for preventing agency reforms that would
improve coordination and execution of climate change and energy
policy.62

13

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

DRIVERS OF POLICY
To understand China’s climate change policy-making it is important to
understand not just the interests of the key actors but also the ways in
which a number of overarching drivers of government policy interact with
climate change policy. An overriding priority of all levels of Chinese
government is economic growth. Economic growth underlies poverty
alleviation, social stability and, ultimately, government legitimacy.
Environmental policies regularly clash with the economic development
goal, as they do around the world. In China, however, the problem is
arguably more acute as the country continues trying to improve the
livelihood of some 157 million of its citizens that still live on less than
$US1.25 a day.
It is hardly surprising, therefore, that the Chinese Government rejects the
idea that it should act on climate change out of any kind of moral
obligation to other countries, especially since developed countries’
historical emissions are larger than China’s. Nevertheless, China is
making significant moves to reduce emissions growth. So what drives
the Chinese Government’s energy and carbon goals?
ENERGY DEMAND AND SECURITY
Until very recently, China’s energy intensity and renewable energy
policies have been primarily driven by Chinese leaders’ anxieties about
the country’s demand for energy. In fact, many of those interviewed for
this paper said the 12th Five Year Plan carbon intensity target was
directly derived from the energy intensity targets.63 There are two main
elements to the energy problem: energy demand and energy security.
China is the world’s largest energy consumer and producer.64
Government leaders are well aware that energy is a key input to
economic growth, and that demand for energy is likely to grow as long
as the economy does (but perhaps not at the same rate).65 In this
context, any additional source of energy is attractive, and any increase in
energy efficiency is desirable. For Chinese policy-makers, therefore, the
issue is not so much about replacing traditional fossil fuels with cleaner
sources, but about getting as much energy as possible out of both
sources.
In the context of an ever-increasing demand for energy, China’s leaders
have also been attentive to the risks associated with importing energy.
China has a very small oil and gas endowment,66 but an extensive coal
resource – more than enough to fill its own energy demand.67 Coal
provides almost 70 per cent of China’s total energy demand68 and
energy makes up almost 80 per cent of China’s annual greenhouse gas
emissions.69 China now uses almost as much coal as the rest of the
world combined. But, while China’s coal resource is abundant, much of it
is located in the hard-to-reach north and north-western provinces.70 And
as enormous as China’s coal resource is, the large and rapidly

14

…the issue is not so
much about replacing
traditional fossil fuels
with cleaner sources, but
about getting as much
energy as possible out of
both sources.

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

expanding economy’s appetite for energy will exhaust supply within
around 30 years on current levels of production.71 In 2009, China
became a net coal importer.72
Figure 9:

Source: US Energy Information Administration. "World Coal Consumption by Region,
Reference Case, 2009-2040." In International Energy Outlook 2013, 2013. US Energy
Information Administration. "World Total Primary Energy Consumption by Region,
Reference Case, 2009-2040." In International Energy Outlook 2013, 2013.

Concern about supplies of traditional energy sources and the security
implications of becoming an energy importer stimulated an interest in
alternative energy sources and energy efficiency well before climate
change became a policy consideration. Meeting energy demand
remains a significant motivator today, although energy security fears
have subsided as China has become more confident on the world
stage.73
China’s energy SOEs also have their own interests with regard to
China’s energy policies. The coal SOEs resist policies that would cut
coal completely out of the energy picture, but, given the ever-soaring
demand for energy, are supportive of energy efficiency goals. The power
SOEs are not tied to coal as a fuel, since many of them have also
benefited from the government’s investments in renewable energy. But
the power SOEs are always keen to ensure that major changes in policy
are implemented slowly enough for their businesses to adjust. The two
major grid companies value grid stability, so they openly resist rapid
growth in intermittent renewable energy sources and seek government
support for infrastructure upgrades.74
The interests of SOEs pull the government in different directions and
regularly delay ambitious reforms. Yet ultimately the government has not

15

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

allowed SOE influence to prevent its push to diversify the energy supply
and support energy efficiency.
Figure 10:

Source: IEA, "World energy balances," in IEA World Energy Statistics and Balances (2013).

ENVIRONMENTAL DEGRADATION
While energy has always been a source of anxiety for China’s
leadership, the nature of the discussion has changed over the last few
years. Although concerns about energy demand and security still exist,
there is a growing concern about environmental degradation, particularly
air pollution.75
China is experiencing severe air and water pollution as a consequence
of the last two decades of rapid industrial development. Not all of this
pollution is caused by electricity generation, but coal-fired power plants
are now widely seen as a major source of air and water quality
degradation, as well as exacerbating the existing water crisis in northern
China. One result of this concern has been the growth in the renewable
energy industry. Developed in the early 2000s primarily for export
purposes, more recently (after experiencing a crash due to overcapacity)
the industry has been charged with supporting an increasingly
environmentally conscious domestic market.76
In fact, the smog problem has now become so bad, and so public, that
the central government sees it as a threat to social stability and,
ultimately, the government’s legitimacy. One interviewee put it this way:
“If the government cannot bring blue sky to the public, the public will
doubt the government.”77 Air pollution is one of the few areas in which
civil society has played a role in pressuring the government to take
action. But its role should not be overstated. The recent air pollution
experience does not necessarily translate to a more expansive role for

16

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

civil society in climate change policy more generally. Of course, it helps
that the air and water pollution problem is one that Beijing’s policymakers must experience for themselves.78

Smog reduction is a
significant enough
priority now that the
Chinese Government is
willing to start making
changes to the energy
system...

Smog reduction is a significant enough priority now that the Chinese
Government is willing to start making changes to the energy system,
which also helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Air Pollution
Prevention Action Plan released in September 2013 aims to reduce air
pollution from coal-fired power plants, industrial pollution and vehicle
emissions.79 Greenpeace has suggested the air pollution response in
China may have a greater impact on world carbon dioxide emissions
than the European Union’s emissions reductions targets.80 It is true that
not all smog reduction policies benefit climate change mitigation – for
example, coal gasification, which would reduce air pollution but increase
greenhouse gas emissions.81 For now, however, the policies are
mutually reinforcing.
ECONOMIC RESTRUCTURING
The increasing levels of pollution have coincided with a fundamental
change in the central government’s mindset away from the ‘pollute first,
clean up later’ maxim of the past towards a ‘low-carbon development’
future.
In the past five years, it has become increasingly evident that China’s
leadership wants to move away from an economy driven by investment
and focused on manufacturing towards one focused on domestic
consumption. The cost of inputs is rising, and China is cognisant of the
‘middle income trap’ – that is, when a rapidly developing economy
stagnates at middle-income level.82 The stakes of potential economic
slowdown are high, since it would call into question the Communist
Party’s legitimacy and threaten social stability.
China’s leaders see the next phase of economic growth in high-tech
industries and efficient, well-functioning (although still centrally
controlled) markets. Wrapped up in this vision for the future economy are
China’s environmental goals. While the leadership is clear-eyed about
the potential costs of stringent environment policies, the Chinese
Government also sees ‘green growth’ as an opportunity. Their view is
that low-carbon industries, among others, hold growth potential, and
China aims to capture a leadership stake in the global low carbon
market.83
An example of policy that serves both the economic restructuring and
carbon mitigation goals is China’s ‘strategic industries’. In the 12th Five
Year Plan, the government rearranged its ‘strategic industries’ to focus
on high-value growth industries, including low-carbon products and
services. According to the NDRC, “when the economic outlook is not
good, developing strategic industries will definitely help alleviate
downward pressure on the economy”. China’s aim is to increase the

17

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

strategic industries’ share of GDP from about 3 per cent at the start of
the 12th Five Year Plan to 8 per cent by 2015 and 15 per cent by 2020.84
Table 2:

Source: Joanna Lewis, "Energy and Climate Goals of China’s 12th Five-Year Plan".

As energy security fears have diminished somewhat and concerns about
the environment have grown, opportunities for foreign exports and
business partnerships have increased. China’s desire for natural gas
imports is likely to increase dramatically, while its demand for coal is
unlikely to subside in the short term.85 The new strategic industries, while
under close government supervision, will also present new opportunities
for business, academic and public policy partnerships. And China’s
desire for ‘green growth’ will fuel more interest in collaborative research
programs with other countries on low-carbon technologies.86
INTERNATIONAL IMAGE
The fourth major driver of China’s climate change policies is the need to
create a positive international image. China wants to be well regarded on
the world stage, and image is increasingly important as its economy
grows.87 China is sensitive to any perception that it is being bullied into
an unfair agreement; in international negotiations, China desires
respect.88 China genuinely thinks it is inequitable for climate change
negotiations to ignore developed countries’ historical emissions, giving
rise to the concept of ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’.
However, interviewees agreed that international image is important, and
it was international pressure that first put climate change on the agenda
in China.89 China’s attitude to international negotiations is the result of
the tension between these two perspectives.90 China is also pragmatic –
all negotiators play it tough to get the most out of the deal, even if their
attitude at home is slightly softer.91
It is also true, however, that China is becoming less sensitive to
international criticism not least because it can increasingly point to real
measures it is taking in response to climate change.92 The impact of
international pressure has also been diminished by what China sees as

18

China is sensitive to any
perception that it is being
bullied into an unfair
agreement...

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

the lack of corresponding action by developed countries, including
Australia. China is losing confidence in the UNFCCC’s effectiveness,
and may turn to regional solutions if the next round of negotiations in
Paris in 2015 is not fruitful.93
In this context, multilateral negotiations may be of declining utility in
shaping Chinese climate change policies. However, China has been
increasingly receptive to foreign governments with experience in
implementing climate change policy measures. For this reason,
European countries and the European Union have had success in
developing relationships through technical cooperation, although these
relationships have not necessarily translated into influence over China’s
position in international negotiations.94 Interviewees said China has been
very interested in Australia’s emissions trading scheme experience,
although this interest has diminished somewhat since the Australian
Government decided to abolish the scheme.95
CLIMATE CHANGE VULNERABILITY
Avoiding the impacts of climate change itself is a driver of climate
change policy, albeit still a secondary one. China is already seeing the
adverse impacts of climate change in the form of extended drought in
the north, extreme weather events and flooding in the south, declining
crop yields, rising seas, and glacial melt in the Himalayas. A recently
released Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report
suggests China could face a worsening water crisis and more severe
flooding, along with an increased risk of disease and changes to its
ecosystem.96 In recent years, vulnerability to climate change has
become an increasingly important factor in the minds of China’s leaders.
Conveniently, the same policies that support energy security, reduce air
pollution, restructure the economy and respond to international pressure
can also have the effect of reducing the risk of dangerous climate
change – at least up to a point. More difficult trade-offs between climate
and economic goals will be required in the 13th and 14th Five Year Plans,
in which the government may need to ease growth targets if it wishes to
keep on track reducing emissions. The next 5-10 years will test the
strength of the Chinese Government’s commitment to reducing carbon
emissions as a driver of policy.
The relationship between climate, environmental, energy and economic
policies is complex. The central government has had difficulty
persuading provincial governments and SOEs to implement its
measures to reduce environmental pollution and restructure the
economy effectively.
To reduce local government and SOE recalcitrance, the central
government is using rhetoric on climate change as a lever to legitimise
national policy. Coal-fired power generation and heavy industry are both
major causes of air and water pollution and represent the old ‘pollute

19

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

first, clean up later’ export-driven economy.97 So the central government
has been using both international pressure on climate change and the
local smog problem to help reinforce its arguments in favour of economic
restructuring.98 In this sense, environmental policies are actually helping
to drive better implementation of broader economic goals.
The messages about energy, environment, environmental degradation
and industry restructuring are fused into the concept of ‘ecological
civilisation’. The phrase refers to the Chinese leadership’s belief that an
emissions and energy intensive economy is not sustainable in the long
run. It is regularly used to distinguish the kind of development path China
seeks to pursue from the kind the developed world took. And it reflects
the growing belief that economic gains must be balanced against
environmental consequences. ‘Ecological civilisation’ has become the
overarching narrative that binds China’s energy, environment and
climate change actions with the government’s social and economic
reforms.

CONCLUSION: THE UNCERTAIN FUTURE
Where China’s climate change policy will go from here is hard to predict.
Interviewees think the 12th Five Year Plan targets are likely to be met
without too much difficulty,99 but beyond that period making real
progress will become far more difficult. The 13th Five Year Plan, which is
already under development, may not contain the binding carbon caps
developed countries are seeking. At the very least it will probably
implement binding coal and energy consumption caps.100 An interviewee
close to China’s policy-making elite said that China is likely to broaden
and improve the emissions trading pilots, regionally if not nationally.101
Many in China’s policy-making community believe that a national
emissions trading scheme, and potentially a carbon tax too, will be in
place by 2020.102 Energy intensity, carbon intensity and non-fossil
energy targets are likely to continue, but their size will depend on how
easily the country can achieve its 12th Five Year Plan targets. But all of
these targets are likely to have more impact in the east than in the west,
as a ‘common but differentiated responsibilities’ concept begins to
emerge within China.103 Still, China’s climate change policy journey is
just beginning. Interviewees close to the central government think it likely
that China will be ready to accept an absolute cap on emissions and set
up a national emissions trading scheme in five to ten years’ time.104
This Analysis underlines that China’s climate change policies are driven
by domestic priorities – energy security, preventing local environmental
degradation, economic restructuring and international image – most of
which also reduce carbon emissions. The fact that national interests are
the underlying motivation for climate change policy is not new; domestic
concerns will always be the foundation of China’s international position
on climate change. Nevertheless, the link between national interests and

20

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

policy action shows that climate change and energy are likely to be
enduring priorities, perhaps growing in importance into the future.
What this Analysis also shows, however, is that there are a range of
entry points and options for the international policy community in shaping
China’s evolving climate change policies, in particular, the expert
community that the Chinese state relies upon to inform policy-making. A
more traditional but still very effective tool for influencing climate change
policy is inter-country exchange on the practical or technical measures
that can be undertaken to address climate change in China. In this
regard, trying to bind China to specific policies through international
agreements should not be seen as the only way to influence China’s
approach to climate – and perhaps not even the most effective.

21

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

NOTES
1

As at 2011 (most recent available). International Energy Agency, "Indicators for
CO2 Emissions," in IEA CO2 Emissions from Fuel Combustion Statistics (2013).

2

Ibid.

3

US Energy Information Administration, "World Carbon Dioxide Emissions by
Region, Reference Case, 2009-2040," in International Energy Outlook 2013
(2013).

4

Ye Qi and Tong Wu, "The Politics of Climate Change in China," Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 4, no. 4 (2013).

5

Feng Wang, Haitao Yin, and Shoude Li, "China’s Renewable Energy Policy:
Commitments and Challenges," Energy Policy 38, no. 4 (2010).

6

Jonathan Moch, "Why is China Taking Action on Clean Energy and Climate
Change?," ChinaFAQs,
http://www.chinafaqs.org/files/chinainfo/ChinaFAQs_IssueBrief_WhyAction_0.pdf.

7

The Transformation of China's Energy System: Challenges and Opportunities,
4 April 2011.

8

Xinhua, "China Announces Targets on Carbon Emission Cuts," Xinhua, 26
November 2009.

9

This paper is focussed on mitigation only. Reforestation and afforestation has
been excluded from the analysis since it contributes only a small fraction to total
greenhouse gas mitigation (3.5 per cent of total net change in carbon dioxide
equivalent in 2009): World Resources Institute, "Climate Analysis Indicators Tool:
WRI’s Climate Data Explorer," World Resources Institute, http://cait2.wri.org.

10

See Moch, "Why is China Taking Action on Clean Energy and Climate
Change?", and Tim Flannery, Roger Beale, and Gerry Hueston, The Critical
Decade: International Action on Climate Change (The Climate Commission
Secretariat (Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency), 2012).
11

CCTV.com, "State Council: 4 Key Environment Indicators Miss Targets,"
CCTV.com, 26 December 2013.
12

REN21, Renewables 2014 Global Status Report (REN21 Secretariat, 2014).

13

Jennifer Duggan, "China Working on Uranium-Free Nuclear Plants in Attempt
to Combat Smog," theguardian.com, 20 March 2014.
14

World Bank, cited in The Economist, "The East is Grey," The Economist, 10
August 2013.

15

The Climate Institute, "China Launching Two More Carbon Markets This
Week," The Climate Institute,
http://www.climateinstitute.org.au/verve/_resources/TCI_MediaBrief_ChinaLaunc
hingTwoMoreCarbonMarkets_November2013.pdf.
16

Nan Xu, "Carbon Emissions Cap Does Little to Help Climate Change,"
chinadialogue (2013), https://www.chinadialogue.net/blog/6056-Carbonemissions-cap-does-little-to-help-climate-change/en.
 

22

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

 

17

Henry Bergsager and Anna Korppoo, "China’s State-Owned Enterprises as
Climate Policy Actors: The Power and Steel Sectors," (Nordic Council of
Ministers, 2013).
18

Qi and Wu, "The Politics of Climate Change in China"; National Development
and Reform Commission, "China's Policies and Actions for Addressing Climate
Change,"
http://en.ndrc.gov.cn/newsrelease/201311/P020131108611533042884.pdf.
19

Qi and Wu, "The Politics of Climate Change in China."

20

Senior researcher in a Chinese government research institute, Beijing (2014).
Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014.
21

Linda Jakobson and Dean Knox, "New Foreign Policy Actors in China," SIPRI
Policy Paper 26 (2010).
22

Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 9 April 2014.
23

Chinese climate change researcher/consultant, interview with author, Beijing,
10 April 2014.
24

Chinese climate change researcher/consultant, interview with author, Beijing,
10 April 2014.
25

Senior researcher in a Chinese institute which advises the government,
interview with author, Beijing, 5 May 2014.
26

Jost Wübbeke, "China's Climate Change Expert Community—Principles,
Mechanisms and Influence," Journal of Contemporary China 22, no. 82 (2013).

27

Ibid.

28

Beijing-based United Nations official, interview with author, Beijing 8 April
2014; Member of a provincial government, interview with author, Shanghai, 1
April 2014; Chinese climate change researcher/consultant, interview with author,
Beijing, 10 April 2014; ibid. Note the focus of this paper is on mitigation policy, but
it is worth noting that other institutions feature when discussing experts on
adaptation and climate science.
29

Senior member of a Chinese government research institute, interview with
author, Beijing, 16 April 2014.
30

Chinese climate change researcher/consultant, interview with author, Beijing,
10 April 2014.
31

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014.
32

Senior member of a Chinese government research institute, interview with
author, Beijing, 16 April 2014.
33

Senior researcher in a Chinese government research institute, interview with
author, Beijing, 17 March 2014.
34

Chinese member of an international non-government organisation, interview
with author, 22 April 2014.
 

23

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

 

35

Stephen Tsang and Ans Kolk, "The Evolution of Chinese Policies and
Governance Structures on Environment, Energy and Climate," Environmental
Policy and Governance 20, no. 3 (2010).
36

Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 9 April 2014.
37

Qi and Wu, "The Politics of Climate Change in China."

38

Ye Qi et al., "Translating a Global Issue into Local Priority: China's Local
Government Response to Climate Change," The Journal of Environment &
Development 17, no. 4 (2008).
39

Alex Wang, "The Search for Sustainable Legitimacy: Environmental Law and
Bureaucracy in China," Harvard Environmental Law Review 37 (2013).

40

Ibid.

41

Member of a provincial government, interview with author, Shanghai, 1 April
2014; Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute,
Beijing, 9 April 2014; Senior member of a Chinese research institute and part of
China’s delegation to international climate change talks, interview with author,
Beijing, 16 April 2014.

42

Senior researcher in a Chinese institute which advises the government,
interview with author, Beijing, 5 May 2014.
43

Michelle Ker and Kate Logan, "New Environmental Law Targets China’s Local
Officials," chinadialogue(2014),
https://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/6939-New-environmentallaw-targets-China-s-local-officials.
44

Senior researcher in a Chinese institute which advises the government,
interview with author, Beijing, 5 May 2014.
45

Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014.
46

Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014.
47

Greg Combet, "Australia and China Strengthen Carbon Market Collaboration,"
(2013). Stian Reklev, "US Consultancy ICF Wins Bid to Help Plan China Carbon
Market," Reuters, 29 January 2014.
48

This section refers to companies owned (or partially owned) by the central
government primarily involving strategic industry sectors.
49

Bergsager and Korppoo, "China’s State-Owned Enterprises as Climate Policy
Actors: The Power and Steel Sectors."
50

Jakobson and Knox, "New Foreign Policy Actors in China."

51

Bergsager and Korppoo, "China’s State-Owned Enterprises as Climate Policy
Actors: The Power and Steel Sectors."
52

The World Bank and the Development Research Center of the State Council,
"China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative Society,"
(Washington, DC: World Bank, 2013).
53

Bergsager and Korppoo, "China’s State-Owned Enterprises as Climate Policy
Actors: The Power and Steel Sectors."
 

24

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

 

54

Senior member of a Chinese research institute and part of China’s delegation
to international climate change talks, interview with author, Beijing, 16 April 2014;
Beijing-based United Nations official, interview with author, 8 April 2014.
55

Member of a large Chinese energy state-owned enterprise, interview with
author, 7 May 2014.
56

Member of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 30 April 2014, Member of a large Chinese energy stateowned enterprise, interview with author, 7 May 2014.
57

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014.
58

Bergsager and Korppoo, "China’s State-Owned Enterprises as Climate Policy
Actors: The Power and Steel Sectors."
59

Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 9 April 2014; Chinese climate change researcher/consultant,
interview with author, Beijing, 10 April 2014; Chinese climate change consultant,
interview with author, Beijing, 14 April 2014; Chinese climate change consultant,
interview with author, Beijing, 15 April 2014.
60

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014.
61

Director of a China-based environmental non-government organisation, email
communication with the author, 27 May 2014.
62

Bergsager and Korppoo, "China’s State-Owned Enterprises as Climate Policy
Actors: The Power and Steel Sectors."
63

Senior Chinese researchers who advise the government, interviews with
author, March-April 2014.
64

US Energy Information Administration, "China,"
http://www.eia.gov/countries/cab.cfm?fips=CH.
65

Fredrich Kahrl and David Roland-Holst, "Growth and Structural Change in
China's Energy Economy," Energy 34, no. 7 (2009).
66

In 2012, China had only 1 per cent of the world’s proven oil reserves and 1.7 of
the world’s proven gas reserves. BP, "BP Statistical Review of World Energy
2013," (2013).
67

Guy C. K. Leung, "China's Energy Security: Perception and Reality," Energy
Policy 39, no. 3 (2011).
68

International Energy Agency, "World Energy Balances," in IEA World Energy
Statistics and Balances (2013).
69

2009 figures (most recent available). World Resources Institute, "Climate
Analysis Indicators Tool: WRI’s Climate Data Explorer".
70

US Energy Information Administration, "China".

71

BP, "BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2013."

72

US Energy Information Administration, "China".

73

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014.
 

25

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

 

74

Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014.
75

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014.
76

Jialu Liu and Don Goldstein, "Understanding China’s Renewable Energy
Technology Exports," Energy Policy 52 (2013).
77

Member of a large Chinese energy state-owned enterprise, interview with
author, 7 May 2014.
78

Lucy Hornby, "Trouble in the Air," Financial Times, 27 February 2014.

79

Barbara Finamore, Alvin Lin, and Christine Xu, "China Pledges to Tackle Air
Pollution with New Plan," Switchboard(2013),
http://switchboard.nrdc.org/blogs/bfinamore/china_pledges_to_tackle_air_po.html.
80

Shuo Li and Lauri Myllyvirta, The End of China’s Coal Boom – 6 Facts You
Should Know (Greenpeace East Asia, 2014).
81

Andrew Maddocks et al., "China's Smog Reduction Plan Could Add to Water
Stress and Boost Emissions," Guardian Professional, 6 November 2013.
82

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014; Moch, "Why is China Taking Action on Clean
Energy and Climate Change?".
83

Ibid.

84

Aileen Wang and Koh Gui Qing, "China Eyes New Strategic Industries to Spur
Economy," Reuters, 23 July 2012.
85

US Energy Information Administration, "China".

86

Senior researcher in a Chinese government research institute, interview with
author, Beijing, 17 March 2014.
87

Senior member of a Chinese research institute and part of China’s delegation
to international climate change talks, interview with author, Beijing, 16 April 2014.
88

Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014.
89

Director of a climate change division in a Chinese university, interview with
author, Beijing, 5 May 2014.

90

David Held, Eva-Maria Nag, and Charles Roger, "The Governance of Climate
Change in China," Preliminary Report, LSE-AFD Climate Governance
Programme Working Paper 1 (2011).
91
Senior member of a Chinese research institute and part of China’s delegation
to international climate change talks, interview with author, Beijing, 16 April 2014.
92

Member of a provincial government, interview with author, Shanghai, 1 April
2014.

93

Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 9 April 2014. It is worth noting that other more junior
interviewees disagreed, saying that China’s focus is and will remain primarily on
international negotiations (Senior member of a Chinese research institute and
part of China’s delegation to international climate change talks, interview with
author, Beijing, 16 April 2014).
 

26

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

 

 

94

Bernice Lee, "The EU and China: Time for a Strategic Renewal," in Hot Issues,
Cold Shoulders, Lukewarm Partners: EU Strategic Partnerships and Climate
Change, ed. Giovanni Grevi and Thomas Renard (Madrid: FRIDE, 2012).
95

Member of a provincial government, interview with author, Shanghai, 1 April
2014; Chinese climate change consultant, interview with author, Beijing, 14 April
2014.

96

IPCC, "Asia," in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability
(Geneva: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 2014).
97

Scientists have presented different opinions on the causes of air pollution – for
example, some say vehicle emissions contribute almost a quarter, and others
say they have a minimal impact. See Shengke Gao, "Scientists Debate Main
Cause of Pollution," Caijing (2014), http://english.caijing.com.cn/2014-0114/113815425.html. The prevailing view of China’s policy-makers is that coalfired power generation is a major contributor (Chinese member of an
international non-government organisation, interview with author, 22 April 2014).
98

Chinese climate change specialist in a non-government organisation, interview
with the author, 15 April 2014.
99

This view is supported by a survey of China based experts in Frank Jotzo,
Dimitri de Boer, and Hugh Kater, "China Carbon Pricing Survey 2013," Centre for
Climate Economics and Policy Working Paper 1305 (2013).
100

Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014; Senior researcher in a Chinese institute which advises the government,
interview with author, Beijing, 5 May 2014.
101

Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 9 April 2014; Chinese professor of economics, interview with
author, Shanghai, 2 April 2014.
102

Jotzo, de Boer, and Kater, "China Carbon Pricing Survey 2013."

103

Chinese member of an international think tank, interview with author, 21 April
2014.
104

Director of a Chinese government climate change research institute, interview
with author, Beijing, 9 April 2014.

27

CHINA’S CLIMATE CHANGE POLICIES: ACTORS AND DRIVERS

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Ms Lisa Williams is the 2014 Lowy Institute-Rio Tinto China Fellow. Prior
to accepting the fellowship, Ms Williams served as an Adviser on
communications policy at the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet (PM&C). She has also worked with PM&C on security and fiscal
policy and with the industry department on climate change and industry
policy. In 2012, Ms Williams worked with the Chinese Academy of Social
Sciences, a Chinese government research institute in Beijing, on lowcarbon financing policy. Ms Williams holds a Bachelor of International
Business and is currently completing a Masters of Asia-Pacific Studies at
the Australian National University.

Lisa Williams

31 Bligh Street
Sydney NSW 2000 Australia

Tel: +61 2 8238 9000
Fax: +61 2 8238 9005

www.lowyinstitute.org
twitter: @lowyinstitute

