Introduction to Cloud Computing
When you store your photos online instead of on your home computer, or use
webmail or a social networking site,
you are using a “cloud computing”
service. If you are an organization,
and you want to use, for example, an
online invoicing service instead of
updating the in-house one you have
been using for many years, that
online invoicing service is a “cloud
computing” service.
Cloud computing refers to the
delivery of computing resources over
the Internet. Instead of keeping data
on your own hard drive or updating
applications for your needs, you use a
service over the Internet, at another
location, to store your information or
use its applications. Doing so may
give rise to certain privacy
implications.
For that reason the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada (OPC) has
prepared some responses to Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs). We have also
developed a Fact Sheet that provides detailed information on cloud computing and
the privacy challenges it presents.

Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is the delivery of computing services over the Internet. Cloud
services allow individuals and businesses to use software and hardware that are
managed by third parties at remote locations. Examples of cloud services include
online file storage, social networking sites, webmail, and online business
applications. The cloud computing model allows access to information and computer
resources from anywhere that a network connection is available. Cloud computing
provides a shared pool of resources, including data storage space, networks,
computer processing power, and specialized corporate and user applications.

The following definition of cloud computing has been developed by the U.S. National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST):
Cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand network
access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks,
servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned
and released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.
This cloud model promotes availability and is composed of five essential
characteristics, three service models, and four deployment models. 1

Characteristics
The characteristics of cloud computing include on-demand self service, broad
network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity and measured service. On-demand
self service means that customers (usually organizations) can request and manage
their own computing resources. Broad network access allows services to be offered
over the Internet or private networks. Pooled resources means that customers draw
from a pool of computing resources, usually in remote data centres. Services can be
scaled larger or smaller; and use of a service is measured and customers are billed
accordingly.
Service models
The cloud computing service models are Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a
Service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). In a Software as a Service
model, a pre-made application, along with any required software, operating system,
hardware, and network are provided. In PaaS, an operating system, hardware, and
network are provided, and the customer installs or develops its own software and
applications. The IaaS model provides just the hardware and network; the customer
installs or develops its own operating systems, software and applications.
Deployment of cloud services:
Cloud services are typically made available via a private cloud, community cloud,
public cloud or hybrid cloud.
Generally speaking, services provided by a public cloud are offered over the
Internet and are owned and operated by a cloud provider. Some examples include
services aimed at the general public, such as online photo storage services, e-mail
services, or social networking sites. However, services for enterprises can also be
offered in a public cloud.
In a private cloud, the cloud infrastructure is operated solely for a specific
organization, and is managed by the organization or a third party.
In a community cloud, the service is shared by several organizations and made
available only to those groups. The infrastructure may be owned and operated by the
organizations or by a cloud service provider.

NIST cloud definition, version 15 http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloudcomputing/
1

2

A hybrid cloud is a combination of different methods of resource pooling (for
example, combining public and community clouds).
Why cloud services are popular
Cloud services are popular because they can reduce the cost and complexity of
owning and operating computers and networks. Since cloud users do not have to
invest in information technology infrastructure, purchase hardware, or buy software
licences, the benefits are low up-front costs, rapid return on investment, rapid
deployment, customization, flexible use, and solutions that can make use of new
innovations. In addition, cloud providers that have specialized in a particular area
(such as e-mail) can bring advanced services that a single company might not be
able to afford or develop.
Some other benefits to users include scalability, reliability, and efficiency. Scalability
means that cloud computing offers unlimited processing and storage capacity. The
cloud is reliable in that it enables access to applications and documents anywhere in
the world via the Internet. Cloud computing is often considered efficient because it
allows organizations to free up resources to focus on innovation and product
development.
Another potential benefit is that personal information may be better protected in the
cloud. Specifically, cloud computing may improve efforts to build privacy protection
into technology from the start and the use of better security mechanisms. Cloud
computing will enable more flexible IT acquisition and improvements, which may
permit adjustments to procedures based on the sensitivity of the data. Widespread
use of the cloud may also encourage
open standards for cloud computing that
will establish baseline data security
features common across different
services and providers. Cloud computing
may also allow for better audit trails. In
addition, information in the cloud is not
as easily lost (when compared to the
paper documents or hard drives, for
example).
Potential privacy risks
While there are benefits, there are
privacy and security concerns too. Data is
travelling over the Internet and is stored
in remote locations. In addition, cloud
providers often serve multiple customers
simultaneously. All of this may raise the
scale of exposure to possible breaches,
both accidental and deliberate.
Concerns have been raised by many that
cloud computing may lead to “function creep” — uses of data by cloud providers that
were not anticipated when the information was originally collected and for which
consent has typically not been obtained. Given how inexpensive it is to keep data,
there is little incentive to remove the information from the cloud and more reasons
to find other things to do with it.

3

Security issues, the need to segregate data when dealing with providers that serve
multiple customers, potential secondary uses of the data—these are areas that
organizations should keep in mind when considering a cloud provider and when
negotiating contracts or reviewing terms of service with a cloud provider. Given that
the organization transferring this information to the provider is ultimately
accountable for its protection, it needs to ensure that the personal information is
appropriate handled.
Privacy is not a barrier but it must be taken into consideration
The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) does not
prevent an organization from transferring personal information to an organization in
another jurisdiction for processing.
However, PIPEDA establishes rules governing those transfers — particularly with
respect to obtaining consent for the collection, use and disclosure of personal
information, securing the data, and ensuring accountability for the information and
transparency in terms of practices.
For more information on the views of the Office of the Privacy Commissioner of
Canada with respect to outsourcing of personal data processing across borders,
please see our Guidelines for Processing Personal Data Across Borders. These
considerations apply whether moving data in the cloud or otherwise.
It is important to note that many non-Canadian based cloud providers may also be
subject to PIPEDA. To the extent that a cloud provider has a real and substantial
connection to Canada, and collects, uses or discloses personal information in the
course of a commercial activity, the provider is expected to protect personal
information, in keeping with PIPEDA.
Conclusion
Cloud computing offers benefits for organizations and individuals. There are also
privacy and security concerns. If you are considering a cloud service, you should
think about how your personal information, and that of your customers, can best be
protected. Carefully review the terms of service or contracts, and challenge the
provider to meet your needs.
For more information on cloud computing, see:
Reaching for the Clouds
The Report on the 2010 Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada’s
Consultations on Online Tracking, Profiling and Targeting, and Cloud Computing
Guidelines for Processing Personal Data Across Borders

4

Frequently Asked Questions
What is cloud computing?
Simply put, cloud computing is the delivery of computing services over the Internet.
Whether they realize it or not, many people use cloud computing services for their
own personal needs. For example, many people use social networking sites or
webmail, and these are cloud services. Photographs that people once kept on their
own computers are now being stored on servers owned by third parties. These are
also examples of cloud services.
Cloud services are popular because people can access their e-mail, social networking
site or photo service from anywhere in the world, at any time, at minimal or no
charge. Some cloud providers may, however, use the personal information of users
for advertising purposes or to learn more about the users for other reasons. The
Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada (OPC) has been critical of some of
these practices, largely because they occur without individuals fully realizing how
their personal information is being used “in the cloud.” Individuals should pay careful
attention to whether and how the cloud company protects their personal information.
Users should also protect their own personal information by using any privacy
settings that the service may offer.
Can cloud computing affect privacy?
When it comes to cloud computing, the security and privacy of personal information
is extremely important. Given that personal information is being turned over to
another organization, often in another country, it is vital to ensure that the
information is safe and that only the people who need to access it are able to do so.
There is the risk that personal information sent to a cloud provider might be kept
indefinitely or used for other purposes. Such information could also be accessed by
government agencies, domestic or foreign (if the cloud provider retains the
information outside of Canada).
For businesses that are considering using a cloud service, it is important to
understand the security and privacy policies and practices of the provider. The terms
of service that govern the relationship with the provider sometimes allow for rather
liberal usage and retention practices.
Which party is accountable for personal information? The business that
collects it from individuals or the cloud provider?
The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) does not
prohibit cloud computing, even when the cloud provider is in another country. Under
PIPEDA, organizations must ensure that they collect personal information for
appropriate purposes and that these purposes be made clear to individuals; they
obtain consent; they limit collection of personal information to those purposes; they
protect the information; and that they be transparent about their privacy practices.
PIPEDA also requires that when an organization transfers personal information to a
third-party for processing, it remains accountable for that information. It must use
contractual or other means to ensure that the personal information transferred to the
third party is appropriately protected. Therefore, an organization that is considering
using a cloud service remains accountable for the personal information that it

5

transfers to the cloud service, and it must ensure that the personal information
remain protected in the hands of that cloud service provider. Organizations need to
carefully review the terms of service of the cloud provider and ensure that the
personal information it entrusts to it will be treated in a manner consistent with
PIPEDA. For more information on transferring of personal information to third
parties, please see our Guidelines for Processing Personal Data Across Borders.
Why are organizations interested in cloud computing?
Cloud computing can significantly reduce the cost and complexity of owning and
operating computers and networks. If an organization uses a cloud provider, it does
not need to spend money on information technology infrastructure, or buy hardware
or software licences. Cloud services can often be customized and flexible to use, and
providers can offer advanced services that an individual company might not have the
money or expertise to develop.
I’ve heard that cloud computing may improve privacy protection. Is this
true?
For businesses that are considering using a cloud service, cloud computing could
offer better protection of personal information compared with current security and
privacy practices. Through economies of scale, large cloud providers may be able to
use better security technologies than individuals or small companies can, and have
better backup and disaster-recovery capabilities. Cloud providers may also be
motivated to build privacy protections into new technology, and to support better
audit trails.
On the other hand, while cloud computing may not increase the risk that personal
information will be misused or improperly exposed, it could increase the scale of
exposure. The aggregation of data in a cloud provider can make that data very
attractive to cybercriminals, for example. Moreover, given how inexpensive it is to
keep data in the cloud, there may be a tendency to retain it indefinitely, thereby
increasing the risk of breaches.
For more information, please see Cloud Computing.

6

